Modify rule S2589: LaYC format (#2195)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S2589/csharp/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

An operand of a boolean expression that never changes the result of the expression might not match the programmer's intent and can lead to unexpected behavior and potential bugs.

[source,csharp]
----
var a = true;
if (a)
{
    DoSomething();
}
----

This also applies to conditional expression in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/null-coalescing-operator[conditional operator] when one of the operands always evaluates to `null`.

[source,csharp]
----
string d = null;
var v1 = d ?? "value";
----

=== Exceptions

This rule will not raise an issue in either of these cases:

* When the condition is a single `const bool`
+
[source,csharp]
----
const bool debug = false;
//...
if (debug)
{
  // Print something
}
----
* When the condition is the literal `true` or `false`.

In these cases, it is obvious the code is as intended.

== How to fix it

The conditions should be reviewed to decide whether:

> * to update the unnecessary operand

Reviewer: NIT: When viewed on GitHub, the bullet points do not show up. A new line is needed:
```suggestion

* to update the unnecessary operand
```

* to remove the unnecessary operand

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
public void Sample(bool b, bool c)
{
    var a = true;
    if (a)                  // Noncompliant: "a" is always "true"
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    if (b && a)             // Noncompliant: "a" is always "true"
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    if (c || !a)            // Noncompliant: "!a" is always "false"
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    string d = null;
    var v1 = d ?? "value";  // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and v1 is always "value".
    var v2 = s ?? d;        // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and v2 is always equal to s.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

* The unnecessary operand is updated
+

> [source,csharp,diff-type=compliant]

Author: Unfortunately, it does not work 😞 
The main issue is what changed lines to display on the noncompliant example.
I let the `diff-type` if, at some point, this will be possible.

----
public void Sample(bool b, bool c, string s)
{
    var a = IsAllowed();
    if (a)                  // Compliant
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    if (b && a)             // Compliant
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    if (c || !a)            // Compliant
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    string d = GetStringData();
    var v1 = d ?? "value";  // Compliant
    var v2 = s ?? d;        // Compliant
}
----

> * The unnecessary operand is removed
> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unnecessary operand is removed:
```

> [source,csharp,diff-type=compliant]

Reviewer: Let's give it a try.
```suggestion
[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
```

== Why is this an issue?

> When an operand of a https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#1224-boolean-expressions[boolean expression] does not influence the result in a condition, it increases cognitive complexity.

Reviewer: I would not link to the C# spec. The spec is hard to read and for language enthusiasts only (You are free to keep the link, if you can explain to me what the `true` operator is, where it originates from, how it is used, how it relates to conditional and/or, and why it shouldn't be used anymore 🤯 ).

It can be shortened and made more precise like so:
```suggestion
An operand of a boolean expression that never changes the result of the expression can be removed.
```
While technically correct, I also think that it is confusing. Maybe you can mix it with the original message or keep the original message.

> If a boolean expression doesn’t change the evaluation of the condition, then it is entirely unnecessary, and can be removed. If it is gratuitous because it does not match the programmer’s intent, then it’s a bug and the expression should be fixed.

Author: I believe mentioning the operand is important as `boolean expression` could be interpreted as the whole condition expression.

I will try to come up with something less confusing.

> [source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: Shouldn't this go into the `How to fix` section?

A minimal example for this section for illustration could be
```cs
if (true)
{
}
```
(I hope this raises the issue).

Author: Doesn't have to be in the `How to fix` section if not too complete, it is our call.
Since we try to have "blog-post" like description, I tend to have most of the content of the rules in the `why` section.

Author: > ```cs
> if (true)
> {
> }
> ```

It does not raise, it has the same exception as [S2583](https://sonarsource.github.io/rspec/#/rspec/S2583/csharp). I will add the same exception section as S2583.

Reviewer: Fair enough, but you have two/three different kinds of examples and two different kinds of fixes (removal vs. correction). This should go into "how to fix", IMO.

=== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp]
[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
public void Sample(bool b, bool c, string s)
public void Sample(bool b, bool c)
{
    var a = true;

>     if (a) // Noncompliant

Reviewer: Why was this example removed?

Author: The given compliant solution was to use a method within the condition. But another compliant solution could be to remove entirely the `if`.
I can add it back and remove the whole `if` as a better compliant example. Since it was my opinion I preferred to remove it.
WDYT?

>     if (b && a)     // Noncompliant: "a" is always "true", only "b" will change the expression result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if (b && a)     // Noncompliant: "a" is always "true" and can be removed
```

>     if (c || !a)    // Noncompliant: "!a" is always "false"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if (c || !a)    // Noncompliant: "!a" is always "false" and can be removed
```

    {
        DoSomething();
    }
}
----

> Since one of the operands is unnecessary to the condition, the condition should be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since one of the operands is unnecessary to the conditions, the conditions should be updated.
```

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
public void Sample(bool b, bool c)
{
    if (b)          // Compliant
    {
        DoSomething();
    }

    if (c)          // Compliant
    {
        DoSomething();
    }
}
----

This also applies to conditional expression in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#1218-conditional-operator[conditional operator]. If one of the operands always evaluates to `null`, the expression should be updated.

[source,csharp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
public void Sample()
{
    string d = null;

>     var v1 = d ?? "value";  // Noncompliant: "d" is always null

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    var v1 = d ?? "value";  // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and v1 is always "value". 
```

>     var v2 = s ?? d;        // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and the produced value is always equal to s.

Reviewer: s is undefined

>     var v2 = s ?? d;        // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and the produced value is always equal to s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    var v2 = s ?? d;        // Noncompliant: "d" is always null and v2 is always equal to s.
```

}
----

[source,csharp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
public void Sample()
{
    var v1 = "value";       // Compliant
    var v2 = s;             // Compliant
}
----

== Resources

=== Documentation

* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/571[MITRE, CWE-571] - Expression is Always True
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/570[MITRE, CWE-570] - Expression is Always False

> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#1224-boolean-expressions[Boolean expressions in C#]
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#1218-conditional-operator[Conditional expression with the conditional operator in C#]

Reviewer: Don't link the spec. Use the Average Joe documentation instead
```suggestion
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/boolean-logical-operators#conditional-logical-and-operator-[Conditional logical AND operator &&]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/boolean-logical-operators#conditional-logical-or-operator-[Conditional logical OR operator ||]
```

Reviewer: Add the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/null-coalescing-operator link

== Why is this an issue?

> An operand of a boolean expression that never changes the result of the expression might not match the programmer's intent and leads to unexpected behavior and potential bugs.

Reviewer: Looks good to me.
```suggestion
An operand of a boolean expression that never changes the result of the expression might not match the programmer's intent and can lead to unexpected behavior and potential bugs.
```
